Exercises

Create a new repository on GitHub to hold your assignments for the Databases module. Create a new branch for Checkpoint 1. Submit your answers.

1. Given the values table below, what data types do each of these values represent?
	A: 'A Clockwork Orange' is a string. 42 is a number. 09/02/1945, is most likely a date if you use the javascript date function, or it could be a string. 98.7 and 15.99 are both numbers, specifically floats. 
2. Explain when a database would be used. Explain when a text file would be used. 	A: If we are not going to be altering or changing our data, or if only person will be manipulating data, it might be acceptable to use a text file. However, if multiple people are going to be making changes to our data at one time, or if we need to access the data beyond a particular application process, we need to use a database.

3. Describe one difference between SQL and other programming languages. 	A: SQL is declarative language, meaning that we can tell SQL what we want and the program will find the best way to accomplish the task. In a procedural language, we need to tell the program how we want it to do a task to get us the results we want.

4. In your own words, explain how the pieces of a database system fit together at a high level. 	A: A database acts much like a spreadsheet. We have a table, with rows and columns that are made up of individual data cells. Columns tell us what the data represents, and rows organize the data into recognizable units. While humans are unable to read a database due to it being in binary, the idea of a table structured this way makes it easier for us to understand.

5. Explain the meaning of table, row, column, and value. 	A: Again, it is similar to a spreadsheet. The table is the entire set of values. The columns tell us what types of data is being stored within the column. The rows keep the related data together so it is easily accessible and organized, and the values represent individual pieces of data that make up the the table. We can use the citations of the rows and columns to retrieve the specific values we want.

6. List three data types that can be used in a table. 	A: We can put many types of data into tables, the most common would most likely be strings, numbers, and dates.

7. Given the payments table below, provide a description in english and the results of the following queries:

	A: Request 1 is asking for all dates and amounts from the payments table. It would return: 5/1/2016, 1500.00; 5/10/2016, 37.00; 5/15/2016, 124.93; 5/23/2016, 54.72.

	Request 2 is asking for any amounts greater than $500. It will only return 1500.00.

	Request 3 is asking for all information related to payee 'Mega Foods'. It will return:
5/15/2016 Mega Foods 124.93 Groceries



 
     SELECT date, amount
     FROM payments;

     SELECT amount
     FROM payments
     WHERE amount > 500;

     SELECT *
     FROM payments
     WHERE payee = "Mega Foods";   
8. Given the users table below, write the following SQL queries and their results:

Select the email and sign-up date for the user named DeAndre Data.

SELECT email, signup
FROM users
WHERE name = 'DeAndre Data';


Select the user ID for the user with email 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu'.

SELECT userid
FROM users
WHERE email = 'aleesia.algorithm@uw.edu';


Select all the columns for the user ID equal to 4.

SELECT *
FROM users
WHERE userid = 4;



values



payments
users

